Added ADR describing support of SDPX SBOM format in konflux (#213)
konflux-ci/architecture: ADR/0044-spdx-support.md

* PURL - Package URL
* Builder images - Images used in FROM instructions in the `Dockerfile`

## Context

SPDX SBOM format enables additional features not available in cyclondedx like multiple purl attributes per component. SPDX is also a widely adopted standard for software bill of materials.
This ADR describes how to enable use of SPDX SBOM format in Konflux.

## Decision

### SBOM lifecycle in build pipeline

At the start SBOMs are generated by [cachi2](#references) and [syft](#references). These two SBOM files are merged together into single SBOM document. At later phase of the build pipeline, builder images of the currently build image are added into SBOM as build dependency of the image. To switch to SPDX format, all tools producing and processing SBOMS in the pipeline has to be able to work with SPDX format. SBOMS of builder images are not processed by the pipeline, therefore builder images SBOMs doesn't have to be in SPDX format. This leads to fact that when tools generating the SBOMs are switched to SPDX format, all tools processing SBOMS can expect SPDX format only. There's no need for any tool to be able to work with mixed inputs of SPDX and CycloneDX formats

> As a result, all tools and tasks should implement the sbomType attribute to specify the expected SBOM format for input and output. This will allow tools to be tested with SPDX before the entire pipeline transitions to this format.

Author: Ok, it makes some sense for tools. But I assume we want to have that attribute for tekton tasks which generates sboms right?

> As a result, all tools and tasks should implement the sbomType attribute to specify the expected SBOM format for input and output. This will allow tools to be tested with SPDX before the entire pipeline transitions to this format.

Reviewer: Yeah, the "output type" param definitely makes sense

### CycloneDX -> SPDX conversion

CycloneDX (1.4) is structured document in json format with following structure (not full specification)

- Document Root
    - Metadata
        - Tools
            - `List<Tool>`
                - vendor

>                 - name

Author: fixed

    - Components
        - `List<Component>`
            - name
            - version
            - purl
            - properties
            - `List<Property>`
                - name
                - value
    - formulations
        - `List<Component>`

SPDX (2.3) is structured document in json format with following structure(not full specification):
- Document Root
    - name
    - SPDXID
    - creationInfo
        - Creators
            - `List<String>`
    - packages
        - `List<Packages>`
            - SPDXID
            - name
            - versionInfo
            - externalRefs
                - `List<ExternalRef>`
                    - referenceCategory
                    - referenceType
                    - referenceLocator
            - annotations
                - `List<Annotation>`
                    - annotationDate
                    - annotationType
                    - annotator
                    - Comment
            - relationships
                - `List<Relationship>`
                    - spdxElementId
                    - relationshipType

>                     - relatedSpdxElement

Author: Yeah, it should be. I messed up indentation when I was copying the text from gdoc

| CycloneDX Attribute        | SPDX Attribute      |
|----------------------------|---------------------|
| components                 | packages            |
| component.name             | package.name        |
| component.version          | package.versionInfo |

#### Component.purl
CycloneDX (version 1.4) supports only a single purl attribute per component. SPDX doesn’t have a direct attribute, but instead every package includes an externalRefs array which describes all external references for the package. There are defined reference categories and types. For PURL, category PACKAGE-MANAGER and type purl is used. The purl itself will be stored as referenceLocator

| CycloneDX Attribute          | SPDX Attribute                                                |
|------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| component.purl = `<PURL>`    | package.externalRefs = [{referenceCategory:”PACKAGE-MANAGER”, |
|                              |                          referenceType:purl,                  |
|                              |                          referenceLocator: `<PURL>`           |

> |                              |                          }]                                   |

Author: I believe this was fixed. All tables look correct to me

> |                              |                          }]                                   |

Reviewer: The loss of indentation hurts readability, especially for this one

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4e2dc48e-b4f7-4e65-ac0b-9b6c56a09b87)

How about changing them from Markdown tables to monospace blocks? Or just wrapping the tables in `` ``` `` so that they look the same as in the source code

#### Formulations
CycloneDX formulations describe how the container was manufactured. In SPDX, Relationship elements can be used for the same purpose. All elements in SPDX have SPDXID attribute which is an element identifier unique in the whole SBOM document. Relationship element describes relation between two elements using their SPDXID and relationship type. Relationship type BUILD_TOOL_OF can be used to express the relationship of packages which were used to build the container.

| CycloneDX Attribute             | SPDX Attribute                                             |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| Formulations.components = [{}]  | Relationships = [                                          |
|                                 |     {                                                      |
|                                 |          spdxElementId = `<ROOT-DOCUMENT-ID>`,             |
|                                 |          relationshipType=DESCRIBES,                       |
|                                 |          relatedSpdxElement=`<CONTAINER-IMAGE-ID>`,        |

> |                                 |     },                                                     |

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why we'd need to add an additional `DESCRIBES` relationship for the builder image. It's connected to the `DESCRIBE`d image transitively by the `BUILD_TOOL_OF` relationship already isn't it? Here's a simple example (in tag form) of a similar situation: only the "thing" has a `DESCRIBES` relationship, not the other things which were used to build it or which it was build from: https://github.com/spdx/spdx-examples/blob/master/software/example1/spdx2.2/example1.spdx

Author: DESCRIBES relations is for container image of image which is being processed, not for builder image.

Author: Cachi2 doesn't use metadata.component and for cdx format, builder deps are populated into formulations. I think metadata.components shouldn't even be mentioned here as we don't work with it explicitly.

Reviewer: Now that we have a section for `metadata.component`, could this go there?

Author: But this is not related to metadata.component. Metadata.component is translated as new root package of spdx. Formulations.components are translated as packages with BUILD_TOOL_OF relationships to the root package

Reviewer: This hunk is for `ROOT-DOCUMENT-ID DESCRIBES CONTAINER-IMAGE-ID`. That's the `metadata.component` no?

Author: Ah, I see. But that's mentioned there only for completeness

Reviewer: So what do you want to do with this? Remove it or move to correct section?

Author: I can remove it if you think it's rather confusing than informative

*Explanation: Root document `DESCRIBES` `CONTAINER-IMAGE-ID` element which represents the container itself. `BUILDER-IMAGE-ID` represents the builder image which was used to build the container. The relationship type `BUILD_TOOL_OF` is used to express that the builder image was used to build the container image.*

#### Metadata.tools
The CycloneDX metadata.tools sub attributes that we are mostly interested in are the vendor and name elements. Information about the creation of the SPDX document can be stored into creationInfo. CreationInfo.creators element is basically a list of strings. There’s a vague specification ([here](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/document-creation-information/#68-creator-field)]) about how it should be structured in the standard. Strings should be formatted in the following way: `<Attribute>: <Value>`. For example vendor should be stored as `Vendor: <vendor>`

| CyloneDX Attribute                             | SPDX Attribute                                    |
|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|

> | Metadata.tools = [{“vendor”: “X”, “name”: “Y”] | CreationInfo.creators = [“Vendor: X”, “Tool: Y”]  |

Author: Yeah, I guess it can be misleading. I'll change it to "tool" only

#### Merging SPDX
##### Packages
Packages of two SPDX documents can be merged together as a concatenation of two lists. In cycloneDX component elements can have only a single purl attribute, therefore component elements representing packages with the same name and version but with different purl have to be stored as multiple elements. SPDX package elements can bear multiple purls. Therefore multiple cycloneDX components can be squashed together into single SPDX package element with purls concatenated into a single list. Following rules are applied to packages merging process:

> - Packages with the same purl's package name and version and type are squashed into single package element

Reviewer: Similar concern to https://github.com/konflux-ci/architecture/pull/213#discussion_r1843490460 - this shouldn't be the authoritative descision on how to merge packages. Not all tools should do it this way, cachi2 certainly shouldn't

Reviewer: Perhaps we can just re-word this to make it clear that this is a sort of default suggestions for how to do the merging if you don't have more specific requirements

Author: yeah, good point

*NOTE: packages cannot be merged together based on SPDXID attribute as there’s no specification in the SPDX standard on how SPDXID should be calculated. Individual tools can calculate it differently while still passing condition to make it unique across the whole document.*

##### Relationships
SPDX relationships represent graph/tree structure of relations of elements in the document. The Root element is the SPDX document itself (with SPDXID SPDXRef-Document).
SPDX Root document typically contains a package representing source used for generating the SBOM. This can be container image, directory, etc. Root document is in relationship DESCRIBES with this source package. Other packages are in specific relationships with the source package. See also [syft specific sbom details](#syft-specific-sbom-details)

> Relations of two documents needs to be merged together into single graph in a way which keeps the graph structure of the original graph of the main document (into which other document will be merged to). Once packages are merged together, relationships of the second document must be cleared off relations which refer to packages not included in the merged package list. SpdxElementId and relatedSpdxElement point to root document id of the second document should be replaced with root document id of the main document. Source package element id in the second documents needs to be replaced with source package element id of the main document.

Author: Sure

#### Metadata.tools
The CycloneDX metadata.tools sub attributes that we are mostly interested in are the vendor and name elements. Information about the creation of the SPDX document can be stored into creationInfo. CreationInfo.creators element is basically a list of strings. There’s a vague specification ([here](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/document-creation-information/#68-creator-field)]) about how it should be structured in the standard. Strings should be formatted in the following way: `<Attribute>: <Value>`. For example vendor should be stored as `Vendor: <vendor>`. Redommendation is to use only Tool as vendor can be misinterpreted as vendor of the SBOM not the tool which created it.

| CyloneDX Attribute                             | SPDX Attribute                                    |
|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Metadata.tools = [{“vendor”: “X”, “name”: “Y”] | CreationInfo.creators = [“Tool: Y”]  |

#### Metadata.component

> Metadata component describes component which is the component which whole SBOM is related to. For example If SBOM describes internal components and dependencies of a container image, this component should represent the container image itself. In SPDX, a package which is equivalent to this component is root package (see [root-packages](#root-packages) to have idea how syft handles this package). This package is in relationship `SPDXRef-ROOT` `DESCRIBES` `SPDXRef-RootPackage`. If there's no cycloneDX metadata.component attribute, SPDX SBOM already includes this "root package" and shouldn't be changed. If there is metadata.component attribute, existing root package should be replaced with the new one representing the SBOM document. All SPDX IDs in relationships refering to the old root package should be replaced with SPDX ID of the new root package. Example:

Reviewer: > SPDX SBOM already includes this "root package" and shouldn't be changed

I'm not sure I understand the context here. Are we talking about merging a CycloneDX doc into an existing SPDX doc? I thought this was about converting CycloneDX to SPDX

We run syft/cachi2 on source directory of a project which should be build into container. Generated SBOM contains

> ```json
> {
>   "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-DOCUMENT",
>   ...

Reviewer: nitpick: the JSON syntax errors are distracting (especially in the un-rendered source, which is entirely red now). You could avoid them by using `jsonc` for the syntax and using comments
```suggestion
```jsonc
{
  "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-DOCUMENT",
  // ...
```

        "downloadLocation": "NOASSERTION",
        "filesAnalyzed": false,
        "licenseConcluded": "NOASSERTION",
        "licenseDeclared": "NOASSERTION",
        "primaryPackagePurpose": "FILE"
      },
      {
      {
        "name": "attrs",
        "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-Package-python-attrs-eef51168ca2a575f",
        "versionInfo": "24.2.0",
        ...
      }
      ...
  ],
  "relationships": [
      {
        "spdxElementId": "SPDXRef-DOCUMENT",
        "relatedSpdxElement": "SPDXRef-DocumentRoot-Directory-.",
        "relationshipType": "DESCRIBES"
      },
      {
          "spdxElementId": "SPDXRef-DocumentRoot-Directory-.",
          "relatedSpdxElement": "SPDXRef-Package-python-attrs-eef51168ca2a575f",
          "relationshipType": "CONTAINS"
      }
      ...
  ]
}
```

And we want that to express that SBOM is actually generated for a container image not for source directory.
So we remove `SPDXRef-DocumentRoot-Directory-.` package and add new virtual package representing the container image. And replace SPDX ID in relationships with ID of the new package. New SBOM should look like this:

```json
{
  "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-DOCUMENT",
  ...
  "packages": [

>       {
>         "name": "container-registry.com/my-org/my-image:latest",
>         "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-DocumentRoot-Image-container-registry.com/my-org/my-image:latest",
>         "versionInfo": "sha256:9ac75c1a392429b4a087971cdf9190ec42a854a169b6835bc9e25eecaf851258",
>         ...
>         "checksums": [
>             {
>                 "algorithm": "SHA256",
>                 "checksumValue": "9ac75c1a392429b4a087971cdf9190ec42a854a169b6835bc9e25eecaf851258"
>             }
>         ],
>         ...
>         "externalRefs": [
>             {
>                 "referenceCategory": "PACKAGE-MANAGER",
>                 "referenceType": "purl",
>                 "referenceLocator": "pkg:oci/container-registry.com/my-org/my-image@sha256:9ac75c1a392429b4a087971cdf9190ec42a854a169b6835bc9e25eecaf851258"

Reviewer: In the interest of aligning with https://github.com/konflux-ci/build-tasks-dockerfiles/pull/181, I think these should be 
```suggestion
      {
        "name": "my-image",
        "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-image",
        "versionInfo": "latest",
        ...
        "checksums": [
            {
                "algorithm": "SHA-256",
                "checksumValue": "9ac75c1a392429b4a087971cdf9190ec42a854a169b6835bc9e25eecaf851258"
            }
        ],
        ...
        "externalRefs": [
            {
                "referenceCategory": "PACKAGE-MANAGER",
                "referenceType": "purl",
                "referenceLocator": "pkg:oci/my-image@sha256:9ac75c1a392429b4a087971cdf9190ec42a854a169b6835bc9e25eecaf851258?repository_url=container-registry.com/my-org/my-image"
```

Author: It's just example, it doesn't really have to be 1:1 with real world output, but ok

# 44. SPDX SBOM support

Date: 2024-09-24

## Status

> Proposed

Reviewer 3: Is the status still proposed or is it accepted now?

|                              |                          }]                                   |
```

#### Component.properties
CycloneDX components properties describe mapping of string:string properties for given component. SPDX component doesn’t have anything similar to cyclonedx properties. SPDX Package annotations are the only attribute where custom data can be stored and the only “customizable” field where there is comment which is a simple string. Due to that fact, cycloneDX property in format of {“name”: <string>, “value”: <string>} is encoded into json string. There can be also annotations produced by other tools. Therefore to be able to tell annotation comment is json encoded, annotator should ends with string “:jsonencoded”. To indicate annotator was a tool, prefix “Tool:" has to be included in the field.

```
| CycloneDX Attribute                       | SPDX Attribute                                 |
|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| components.properties = [                 | package.annotations = [                        |

> |   {“name”: …, “value”: …}                 |   {..., annotator: "`Tool:<tool>`:jsonencoded” |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|   {“name”: …, “value”: …}                 |   {..., annotator: "`Tool: <tool>`:jsonencoded” |
```

Author: Why would you want to have space there?

Reviewer: I thought the missing space was a typo, based on the other mention of `Tool: <tool>` in this doc and https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/document-creation-information/#68-creator-field

Author: It looks like both variants are valid (according to validation tool) . I personally prefer one without space as when converting back to cyclonedx you can simply remove the prefix, but in the spec there is a space. So maybe lets put there a space just to be spec compatible.

      },
      {
      {
        "name": "attrs",
        "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-Package-python-attrs-eef51168ca2a575f",
        "versionInfo": "24.2.0",
        ...
      }
      ...
  ],
  "relationships": [
      {
        "spdxElementId": "SPDXRef-DOCUMENT",
        "relatedSpdxElement": "SPDXRef-DocumentRoot-Image-container-registry.com/my-org/my-image:latest",
        "relationshipType": "DESCRIBES"
      },
      {
          "spdxElementId": "SPDXRef-DocumentRoot-Image-container-registry.com/my-org/my-image:latest",
          "relatedSpdxElement": "SPDXRef-Package-python-attrs-eef51168ca2a575f",
          "relationshipType": "CONTAINS"
      }
      ...
  ]
}
```

#### SPDX specific attributes

There are SPDX attributes which are required to be present in the document, however there's
no cycloneDX equivalent for them. These attributes are:

##### Document.documentNamespace

documentNamespace is URI which provides way how locate the document or reference it other documents. When creating SPDX document locally via syft or cachi2, this attribute has no meaning
as it's not clear yet how the document will be published. Therefore it's set to `NOASSERTION`.

> However when the document is copied to a container. It would make sense to provide a link to the document container

Reviewer: @Allda thoughts? Currently, the image-index SBOM uses a made up documentNamespace https://github.com/konflux-ci/build-tasks-dockerfiles/blob/377a181fc0ae4bbcbccfef9a5fc677c6a7b322b8/sbom-utility-scripts/scripts/index-image-sbom-script/index_image_sbom_script.py#L154

Reviewer 2: The `documentNamespace` is not intended to be interpreted as a URL. It is simply a unique name for the document, so that `externalDocumentRefs` can refer to other documents in the same collection. See §6.5.2, "SPDX document namespace field - Intent":
> NOTE: The URI does not have to be accessible. It is only intended to provide a unique ID. In many cases, the URI will point to a Web accessible document, but this should not be assumed to be the case.
NOTE: The URI does not have to be accessible. It is only intended to provide a unique ID. In many cases, the URI will point to a Web accessible document, but this should not be assumed to be the case.

https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/document-creation-information/#652-intent

Reviewer: Ack. We probably shouldn't use `NOASSERTION` then, and the way `index_image_sbom_script.py` does it seems fine

##### Package.downloadLocation

> downloadLocation is URI which provides way how to download the package. When creating SPDX document locally via syft, this information is not available. Also syft doesn't provide anything to this field. Therefore it's set to `NOASSERTION`.

Reviewer: More general rather than just focusing on Syft please :pray: 
```suggestion
downloadLocation is URI which provides way how to download the package. This is not always available, and it's not clear if it's useful. Therefore it's set to `NOASSERTION`.
```
